棋子行棋规则帅/将移动范围：只能在九宫内移动移动规则：每一步只可以水平或垂直移动一点特殊规则：
帅和将不准在同一直线上直接对面（中间无棋子），如一方已先占据位置，则另一方必须回避，否则就算输仕/士移动范围：只能在九宫内移动移动规则：每一步只可以沿对角线方向移动一点相/象移动范围：
河界的一侧移动规则：每一步只可以沿对角线方向移动两点，可使用汉字中的田字形象地表述：田字格的对角线，俗称相（象）走田字。当相（象）行走路线中，即田字中心有棋子时（无论己方或是对方棋子），则不允许走过去，俗称：塞相（象）眼。馬移动范围：任何位置移动规则：每一步只可以水平或垂直移动一点，再按对角线方面向左或者右移动。可使用汉字中的日字来形容马的行走方式，俗称：马走日字（斜对角线）。当馬行走时，第一步直行或横行处有别的棋子（无论己方或是对方棋子）挡住，则不许走过去，俗称：蹩马腿。車移动范围：任何位置移动规则：可以水平或垂直方向移动任意个无阻碍的点炮/砲移动范围：任何位置移动规则：移动起来和车很相似，但它必须跳过一个棋子来吃掉对方棋子。兵/卒移动范围：任何位置移动规则：过河界前，每步只能向前移动一点。过河界后，增加了向左右移动的能力，兵（卒）不允许向后移动。

唯一例外的是炮的吃棋方法，比较特殊，需要中间隔有棋子（无论是己方或对方棋子）才能吃掉对方的棋子。

Rules for moving chess pieces. Movement range of general/general: can only move within the nine palaces. Movement rules: each step can only move one point horizontally or vertically. Special rules:
Commanders and generals are not allowed to face each other directly on the same straight line (without chess pieces in the middle). If one party has occupied the position first, the other party must avoid it, otherwise it will be lost. Movement range: can only move within the nine palaces. Movement rules: every step Only one point can be moved in the diagonal direction. Phase/image movement range:
The rules for moving one side of the river boundary: each step can only move two points in the diagonal direction, which can be expressed vividly using the Chinese character Tian. The diagonal line of the Tian character grid is commonly known as the phase (image) moving Tian character. When the Xiang (Elephant) is walking on the route, that is, when there is a chess piece in the center of the field (whether it is one's own or the opponent's chess piece), he is not allowed to walk past it, which is commonly known as: blocking the Xiang (Elephant's) eye. Horse movement range: Any position Movement rules: Each step can only move a little horizontally or vertically, and then move diagonally to the left or right. You can use the Chinese character "日" to describe the horse's walking style, which is commonly known as: "horse walks in the sun" (diagonally). When the horse is walking, if there are other chess pieces (either your own or the opponent's chess pieces) blocking the straight or sideways first step, it is not allowed to walk past it. This is commonly known as: lame horse's leg. Rook movement range: Any position Movement rules: Can move any number of unobstructed cannons/cannons horizontally or vertically Movement range: Any position Movement rules: It moves very similar to a rook, but it must jump over a chess piece to capture the opponent piece. Pawn/pawn movement range: Any position Movement rules: Before crossing the river boundary, each step can only move forward one point. After crossing the river boundary, the ability to move left and right is added, and soldiers (pawns) are not allowed to move backward.

The only exception is the cannon's way of capturing chess, which is quite special. It requires a chess piece in the middle (whether it is one's own or the opponent's chess piece) in order to capture the opponent's chess piece.
